=== RELEVANT TEMPERATURE SECTIONS ===


--- 1. TRANSOLVER++ (Ada-Temp) ---

j=1
,
(1)
where τ0 is the temperature constant. Next, the canonical
attention mechanism is applied to learned physical states to
capture underlying physics interactions:
q, k, v = Linear(s), s′ = Softmax
qk⊤
√
C

adjustment to the physics learning process. Specifically, we
change the sharpness of the state distribution by learning to
adjust the temperature τ0 in the Softmax function, namely
Ada-Temp: τ = {τi}N
i=1 = {τ0 + Linear(xi)}N
i=1 ,
(3)
where τ ∈RN×1 and a higher temperature forms a more
uniform distribution, while a lower temperature makes the
distribution more concentrated on crucial states. Through a
learnable linear projection layer, we can dynamically adjust
the state distribution based on each point’s local properties.
Slice reparameterization
As mentioned above, we try
to learn eidetic physical states and assign mesh points to
physical states with a possibility w. In the canonical design
of Transolver, it uses Softmax to form a categorical distribu-
tion across states. However, simply generating a categorical
distribution is not enough, as we have not completely mod-
eled the assignment process from points to certain physical
states. Considering that direct sampling via Argmax is non-
differentiable, we propose to adopt the Gumbel-Softmax
(Jang et al., 2017) to perform differentiable sampling from
the discrete categorical distribution, which is accomplished
with the following reparameterization technique:
Rep-Slice(x, τ) = Softmax
Linear(x) −log(−log ϵ)
τ

,
(4)
where τ ∈RN×1 is the local adaptive temperature and ϵ =
{ϵi}N
i=1, ϵi ∼U(0, 1). Here log(−log ϵi) ∼Gumbel(0, 1),
where Gumbel is a type of generalized extreme value dis-
tribution. Replacing Transolver’s slice weights w in Eq. (1)


--- 2. QK-NORM (Learnable Scaling) ---

Interestingly, Nguyen and
Salazar (2019) ﬁnd PRENORM to be superior in
low-resource but not high-resource translation set-
tings.

Lastly, SCALENORM replaces layer normaliza-
tion with (cid:96)2 normalization along the embedding
dimension, multiplied by a learnable scalar param-
eter initialized with 1√
(where d is the embedding
d
dimension; the same term is used in scaled dot

product attention (Vaswani et al., 2017)).

In other words, SCALENORM applies (cid:96)2 normal-
words it should not attend to. Instead of dividing by
√
d as in scaled dot product attention we scale up
using a learnable parameter that we initialize with
a value that depends on the length of the sequences
in the training data (and hence on the number of
elements in QKT ):

g0 = log2(L2 − L)

(3)

where L is the 97.5th percentile sequence length
across all training data sequences for source and
target.

The attention operation thus changes from

softmax(

QKT
√
d

)V

(4)

to

softmax(g ∗ ˆQ ˆKT )V
(5)
where ˆQ and ˆK are Q and K with (cid:96)2-normalization
applied along their head dimensions and g is a
learnable scalar parameter initialized with g0 as
computed in (3).

4248Examples

gl→en
sk→en
en→vi
en→he
ar→en

10k


--- 3. LOW-WIDTH GRAPH TRANSFORMERS (Temperature Annealing) ---

to size one reduced the performance significantly; however, adding a learnable global scale s, so that
Vi becomes s Vi/||Vi||2, maintained performance while making attention scores more meaningful.

Variable Temperature One of the side goals is to have sharper attention scores, guiding the nodes
to get their information from as few nodes as possible. Using temperature in the attention mechanism
is a natural way to do this, where logits before the softmax will be divided by a temperature factor
τ . Normal attention corresponds to τ = 1; smaller τ means sharper attention scores. However,
setting the temperature to a small value from the beginning will make the random initialization more
significant, and increase the randomness in the training process. Instead, we start with τ = 1.0 and
gradually anneal it to 0.05 by the end of the training. We set an initial phase for c epochs where
we use τ = 1; this lets the model learn which neighbors are more important for each node slowly.
Then we multiply the τ with a factor f after each epoch, getting a temperature in epoch t > c of
max(f t−c, 0.05). For fast-converging models, we use c = 5, f = 0.98; for slower-converging ones,
we use c = 10, f = 0.95.

4.2 Sparser Attention Pattern

The memory and time complexity of Exphormers is linearly dependent on the number of edges.
Reducing the number of edges can alleviate memory consumption. Additionally, a sparser pattern
means that batching techniques such as ego subgraphs can be effectively applied to the model. In
this work, we analyze how effective the sparser model can work and up to what factor we can


--- 4. GNOT (Heterogeneous Normalized Attention) ---

